An array is a collection of elements of the same data
type.
∑ The elements of an array are stored in consecutive
memory locations and are referenced by an index
(also known as the subscript).
∑ The index specifies an offset from the beginning of
the array to the element being referenced.
∑ Declaring an array means specifying three
parameters: data type, name, and its size.
∑ The length of an array is given by the number of
elements stored in it.
∑ There is no single function that can operate on all
the elements of an array. To access all the elements,
we must use a loop.
∑ The name of an array is a symbolic reference to
the address of the first byte of the array. Therefore,
whenever we use the array name, we are actually
referring to the first byte of that array.
∑ C considers a two-dimensional array as an array of
one-dimensional arrays.
∑ A two-dimensional array is specified using two
subscripts where the first subscript denotes the row
and the second subscript denotes the column of the
array.
∑ Using two-dimensional arrays, we can perform the
different operations on matrices: transpose, addition,
subtraction, multiplication.
∑ A multi-dimensional array is an array of arrays. Like
we have one index in a one-dimensional array, two
indices in a two-dimensional array, in the same way
we have n indices in an n-dimensional or multidimensional
array. Conversely, an n-dimensional
array is specified using n indices.
∑ Multi-dimensional arrays can be stored in either row
major order or column major order.
∑ Sparse matrix is a matrix that has large number of
elements with a zero value.
∑ There are two types of sparse matrices. In the first
type, all the elements above the main diagonal have
a zero value. This type of sparse matrix is called
a lower-triangular matrix. In the second type, all
the elements below the main diagonal have a zero
value. This type of sparse matrix is called an uppertriangular
matrix.
∑ There is another variant of a sparse matrix, in which
elements with a non-zero value can appear only
on the diagonal or immediately above or below
the diagonal. This type of sparse matrix is called a
tridiagonal matrix.