
∑ Searching refers to finding the position of a value
in a collection of values. Some of the popular
searching techniques are linear search, binary search,
interpolation search, and jump search.
∑ Linear search works by comparing the value to be
searched with every element of the array one by one
is a sequence until a match is found.
∑ Binary search works efficiently with a sorted list. In
this algorithm, the value to be searched is compared
with the middle element of the array segment.
∑ In each step of interpolation search, the search
space for the value to be found is calculated. The
calculation is done based on the values at the bounds
of the search space and the value to be searched.
∑ Jump search is used with sorted lists. We first check
an element and if it is less than the desired value, then
a block of elements is skipped by jumping ahead, and
the element following this block is checked. If the
checked element is greater than the desired value,
then we have a boundary and we are sure that the
desired value lies between the previously checked
element and the currently checked element.
∑ Internal sorting deals with sorting the data stored
in the memory, whereas external sorting deals with
sorting the data stored in files.
∑ In bubble sorting, consecutive adjacent pairs of
elements in the array are compared with each other.
∑ Insertion sort works by moving the current data
element past the already sorted values and repeatedly
interchanging it with the preceding value until it is
in the correct place.
∑ Selection sort works by finding the smallest value
and placing it in the first position. It then finds the
second smallest value and places it in the second
position. This procedure is repeated until the whole
array is sorted.
∑ Merge sort is a sorting algorithm that uses the divide,
conquer, and combine algorithmic paradigm. Divide
means partitioning the n-element array to be sorted
into two sub-arrays of n/2 elements in each subarray.
Conquer means sorting the two sub-arrays
recursively using merge sort. Combine means
merging the two sorted sub-arrays of size n/2 each
to produce a sorted array of n elements. The running
time of merge sort in average case and worst case
can be given as O(n log n).
∑ Quick sort works by using a divide-and-conquer
strategy. It selects a pivot element and rearranges
the elements in such a way that all elements less
than pivot appear before it and all elements greater
than pivot appear after it.
∑ Radix sort is a linear sorting algorithm that uses the
concept of sorting names in alphabetical order.
∑ Heap sort sorts an array in two phases. In the first
phase, it builds a heap of the given array. In the
second phase, the root element is deleted repeatedly
and inserted into an array.
∑ Shell sort is considered as an improvement over
insertion sort, as it compares elements separated by
a gap of several positions.
∑ A tree sort is a sorting algorithm that sorts numbers
by making use of the properties of binary search tree.
The algorithm first builds a binary search tree using
the numbers to be sorted and then does an in-order
traversal so that the numbers are retrieved in a sorted
order.
