
A graph is basically a collection of vertices (also
called nodes) and edges that connect these vertices.
∑ Degree of a node u is the total number of edges
containing the node u. When the degree of a node
is zero, it is also called an isolated node. A path P
is known as a closed path if the edge has the same
end-points. A closed simple path with length 3 or
more is known as a cycle.
∑ A graph in which there exists a path between any two
of its nodes is called a connected graph. An edge that
has identical end-points is called a loop. The size of
a graph is the total number of edges in it.
∑ The out-degree of a node is the number of edges that
originate at u.
∑ The in-degree of a node is the number of edges that
terminate at u. A node u is known as a sink if it has
a positive in-degree but a zero out-degree.
Breadth-first search is a graph search algorithm
that begins at the root node and explores all the
neighbouring nodes. Then for each of those nearest
nodes, the algorithm explores their unexplored
neighbour nodes, and so on, until it finds the goal.
∑ The depth-first search algorithm progresses by
expanding the starting node of G and thus going
deeper and deeper until a goal node is found, or until
a node that has no children is encountered.
A transitive closure of a graph is constructed to
answer reachability questions.
∑ Since an adjacency matrix contains only 0s and 1s,
it is called a bit matrix or a Boolean matrix. The
memory use of an adjacency matrix is O(n2
), where
n is the number of nodes in the graph.
∑ Topological sort of a directed acyclic graph G is
defined as a linear ordering of its nodes in which
each node comes before all the nodes to which it
has outbound edges. Every DAG has one or more
number of topological sorts.
∑ A vertex v of G is called an articulation point if
removing v along with the edges incident to v
results in a graph that has at least two connected
components.
∑ A biconnected graph is defined as a connected graph
that has no articulation vertices.
A spanning tree of a connected, undirected graph G
is a sub-graph of G which is a tree that connects all
the vertices together.
∑ Kruskal’s algorithm is an example of a greedy
algorithm, as it makes the locally optimal choice
at each stage with the hope of finding the global
optimum.
∑ Dijkstra’s algorithm is used to find the length of an
optimal path between two nodes in a graph.


