
A tree is a data structure which is mainly used to
store hierarchical data. A tree is recursively defined
as collection of one or more nodes where one node is
designated as the root of the tree and the remaining
nodes can be partitioned into non-empty sets each
of which is a sub-tree of the root.
∑ In a binary tree, every node has zero, one, or at the
most two successors. A node that has no successors
is called a leaf node or a terminal node. Every node
other than the root node has a parent.
∑ The degree of a node is equal to the number of
children that a node has. The degree of a leaf node
is zero. All nodes that are at the same level and share
the same parent are called siblings.
∑ Two binary trees having a similar structure are said
to be copies if they have the same content at the
corresponding nodes.
∑ A binary tree of n nodes has exactly n – 1 edges. The
depth of a node N is given as the length of the path
from the root R to the node N. The depth of the root
node is zero.
∑ A binary tree of height h has at least h nodes and at
most 2h – 1 nodes.
∑ The height of a binary tree with n nodes is at
least log2(n+1) and at most n. In-degree of
a node is the number of edges arriving at that node.
The root node is the only node that has an in-degree
equal to zero. Similarly, out-degree of a node is the
number of edges leaving that node.
∑ In a complete binary tree, every level (except
possibly the last) is completely filled and nodes
appear as far left as possibly.
∑ A binary tree T is said to be an extended binary tree
(or a 2-tree) if each node in the tree has either no
children or exactly two children.
∑ Pre-order traversal is also called as depth-first traversal.
It is also known as the NLR traversal algorithm (NodeLeft-Right)
and is used to extract a prefix notation from
an expression tree. In-order algorithm is known as the
LNR traversal algorithm (Left-Node-Right). Similarly,
post-order algorithm is known as the LRN traversal
algorithm (Left-Right-Node).
∑ The Huffman coding algorithm uses a variablelength
code table to encode a source character where
the variable-length code table is derived on the basis
of the estimated probability of occurrence of the
source character.