
A file is a block of useful information which is
available to a computer program and is usually stored
on a persistent storage medium.
∑ Every file contains data. This data can be organized
in a hierarchy to present a systematic organization.
The data hierarchy includes data items such as fields,
records, files, and database.
∑ A data field is an elementary unit that stores a single
fact. A record is a collection of related data fields
which is seen as a single unit from the application
point of view. A file is a collection of related records.
A directory is a collection of related files.
∑ A database is defined as a collection of data
organized in a fashion that facilitates updating,
retrieving, and managing the data.
∑ There are two types of computer files—text files and
binary files. A text file is structured as a sequence of
lines of alphabet, numbers, special characters, etc.
However, the data in a text file is stored using its
corresponding ASCII code. Whereas in binary files,
the data is stored in binary form, i.e., in the format
it is stored in the memory.
∑ Each file has a list of attributes associated with it
which can have one of two states—on or off. These
attributes are: read-only, hidden, system, volume
label, archive, and directory.
∑ A file marked as read-only cannot be deleted or
modified.
∑ A hidden file is not displayed in the directory listing.
∑ A system file is used by the system and should not
be altered or removed from the disk.
∑ The archive bit is useful for communication between
programs that modify files and programs that are used
for backing up files.
∑ A file that has the directory bit turned on is actually
a sub-directory containing one or more files.
∑ File organization means the logical arrangement
of records in the file. Files can be organized as
sequential, relative, or index sequential.
∑ A sequentially organized file stores records in the
order in which they were entered.
∑ In relative file organization, records in a file are
ordered by their relative key. Relative files can be
used for both random access as well as sequential
access of data.
∑ In an indexed sequential file, every record is uniquely
identified by a key field. We maintain a table known
as the index table that stores record number and the
address of the record in the file.
∑ There are several indexing techniques, and each
technique works well for a particular application.
∑ In a dense index, index table stores the address of
every record in the file. However, in a sparse index,
index table stores address of only some of the records
in the file.
∑ Cylinder surface indexing is a very simple technique
which is used only for the primary key index of a
sequentially ordered file.
∑ In multi-level indexing, we can create an index to
the index itself. The original index is called the firstlevel
index and the index to the index is called the
second-level index.
Inverted files are frequently used indexing technique
in document retrieval systems for large textual
databases. An inverted file reorganizes the structure
of an existing data file in order to provide fast access
to all records having one field falling within set
limits.
∑ Majority of the database management systems use
B-tree indexing technique. The index consists of a
hierarchical structure with upper blocks containing
indices pointing to the lower blocks and lowest level
blocks containing pointers to the data records.
∑ Hashed file organization uses hashed indices. Hashing
is used to calculate the address of disk block where
the desired record is stored. If K is the set of all search
key values and B is the set of bucket addresses, then
a hash function H maps K to B.